# this is a list of all the entries in the database that might need adjusting from the start_up/Vatican/CCC_table.txt file
PROLOGUE$"FATHER,... this is eternal life, that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent."
PROLOGUE$"God our Saviour desires all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth."
PROLOGUE$"There is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved" - than the name of JESUS.
$he Church never ceases to proclaim her faith in one only God: Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
The Apostles Creed$I believe in God the Father almighty, creator of heaven and earth. I believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord. He was conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit and born of the Virgin Mary Under Pontius Pilate He was crucified, died, and was buried. He descended to the dead. On the third day he rose again. He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father. He will come again to judge the living and the dead. I believe in the Holy Spirit, the holy catholic Church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.
The Nicene Creed$We believe in one God, the Father, the Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of all that is, seen and unseen. We believe in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only Son of God, eternally begotten of the Father, God from God, Light from Light, true God from true God, begotten, not made, of one Being with the Father. Through him all things were made. For us men and for our salvation, he came down from heaven: by the power of the Holy Spirit he was born of the Virgin Mary, and became man. For our sake he was crucified under Pontius Pilate; he suffered died and was buried. On the third day he rose again in fulfillment of the Scriptures; he ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father. He will come again in glory to judge the living and the dead, and his kingdom will have no end. We believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son. With the Father and the Son he is worshipped and glorified. He has spoken through the Prophets. We believe in one holy catholic and apostolic Church. We acknowledge one baptism for the forgiveness of sins. We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.
$It is written: "You shall worship the Lord your God and him only shall you serve."
$ou have heard that it was said to the men of old, "You shall not swear falsely. . But I say to you, Do not swear at all.
$he sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath; so the Son of Man is lord even of the sabbath.
$But I say to you that every one who looks at a woman lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
