7
[sec]Introduction
[a]God Reveals Himself to Us
[image: Thomas questioning Jesus at the Last Supper (not post Resurrection)]
No matter the hectic nature of your life—maintaining a GPA, participating in extracurriculars,
working a parttime job, having a social life, living in a family—you are bound to sometimes
look way out into your future and ask yourself “the big questions”: Why am I here? What is the
purpose of life? What happens after I die? Asking these questions is not out of the normal. There is
no escaping that you are hardwired for something more than any of your current tasks and
goals.
The perennial big questions have been asked by people for all time. Neither is this by
accident. You were, indeed, made for much, much more. You instinctively know that you are
unique among all other people. Scientifically, it is factual statement to say that no one else exists
or has existed with your exact DNA. Your life didn’t come about by chance. There is a Creator
who designed you and brought you into existence. The Almighty God who made you
understandably wants you, his creation, to be connected with him. Think of the bond parents
want with their children. God desires this connection to an even deeper level, to a level called
communion. The Catechism of the Catholic Church puts it this way: “The desire for God is written
on the human heart, because [you have been] created by God and for God” (CCC 27).
Sometimes these big questions come to the forefront when you are disappointed by
something or someone. Or, you may even feel pensive in this way after successfully reaching a
goal that you had worked very hard to achieve. After a bit of jubilation, you may have thought
to yourself, “Is that it?” Even people who achieve the highest levels of success in business,8
athletics, popular stardom—whatever—usually ending up asking themselves that exact same
question: “Is that it?” Typically, though, most of us brush off the thought and just move on to
the next goal. However, it is worth your time to give the big questions of life some additional
consideration. This course will provide information and resources to help you to examine in
greater detail someone Catholics profess to be the Incarnate Son of God who came to the earth
to provide answers. That person is Jesus Christ. The Apostle Thomas asked Jesus a “big
question” of Jesus at the Last Supper: “How can we know the way?” Jesus said to him, “I am
the way and the truth and the life” (Jn 14:5, 6).
[b]Waiting for the Messiah
[image: recreate covenant infographic from current Jesus 2, page 8, with new images and
design; place within this “b” section]
[SL 76]Through human reason, people from all time have formed answers to questions about
life, death, and eternity and God himself. Human reason allows us the capacity for
understanding some of life’s mystery. For example, humans know instinctively that killing an
innocent person is wrong. Human reason is not enough to understand the deepest and
complete designs of God, however. God himself must reveal himself and the depths of the plans
he has for human beings. [SL 1]God did so through the course of salvation history, the name for
the account of God’s saving activity and intervention on humanity’s behalf. [SL 2]The events of
salvation history are told in Sacred Scripture, in both the Old Testament and New Testament.9
[SL 98]God’s revelation progressed in response to the Original Sin of the first humans,
named Adam and Eve, who rejected a life of communion with God.1 After their fall, he chose a
specific ethnic people to be his own and began to reveal himself to them over centuries.
Through a series of covenants (see accompanying infographic) with the Israelites (later called
the Jews), God offered human beings a new chance not only to know him but to know him
better. Within the Sinai Covenant with Moses, for example, God provided a Law to help them
better understand how they should live moral lives. This was something other nations did not
possess. [SL 32]Ultimately, God offered the promise of redemption, which many Israelites
understood would come from a chosen prophet, king, or messiah.
The New Testament period of the early first century AD was high in messianic expectations.
Most Jews believed that God would send his Chosen One, the Messiah, very soon. The Hebrew
word masiah translates to the Greek word Christos (Christ), which means “anointed one.” At
first, the title messiah applied to the king of Israel (e.g., King David and his successors).
However, David’s successors were mostly weak and corrupt.
Even when the monarchy era ended for the Jews, the belief in God’s promise to provide a
messiah never died among them. By the time of Jesus, many Jews increasingly believed that a
messiah would usher in God’s Kingdom or reign. Various Jewish sects in Jesus’ day (e.g.
Sadducees, Pharisees, Zealots, and Essenes) had different kinds of expectations about who or
what kind of person the Messiah would be. Most Jews expected a political or military leader
1 Redemption in Christ, which will be covered in more depth throughout this text, includes forgiveness of Original
Sin and all personal sins in the Sacrament of Baptism. However, the other effects of Original sin, including the
struggle with concupiscence (inclinations to sin), remain and call people to maintain a constant spiritual battle with
evil (see CCC 409).10
like King David who would lead them to reestablish a strong, independent nation of Israel and
help usher in God’s Kingdom on earth. Also, some Jews (possibly including John the Baptist)
fully expected the coming of the Messiah to be accomplished in an apocalyptic event which
would be dramatic, pointing to the Messiah’s identity and glorious establishment of God’s
Kingdom.
[b]The Uniqueness of Jesus
[SL 18]What none of the Jews or anyone else of the first century could have imagined was that
the Messiah would be a God/Man. Jesus is unique is that in his one Divine Person he brings
together the union of human and divine natures. This is called the hypostatic union.2 Jesus is not
“part man, part God.” He is not a mixture of the two, like an orange and water in a blender to
make orange juice. Nor is he sometimes God, sometimes man, as if he could turn on and off one
or the other as with a light switch. Jesus became truly man, while remaining truly God. This
truth about Jesus, the Messiah, means that he is most unique in all human history; the
Incarnation, that is the coming of God in human form to this planet, happened only once. As St.
John Paul II wrote in Crossing the Threshold of Hope:
If he were only a wise man like Socrates, if he were a “prophet” like Muhammad,
if he were an “enlightened” like Buddha, without any doubt he would not be
what he is. He is the one mediator between God and humanity. He is mediator
because he is both God and man.
2 Hypostatic comes from a Greek term that means “which lies beneath as basis or foundation.” The term was used
by Greek philosophers to distinguish what can be seen on the surface from the reality which lies below.